This section will attempt a very brief description of the MonkeyLogic system, but a more detailed description of all the menus and options can be found [here](https://monkeylogic.nimh.nih.gov/index.html). 

In a nutshell, MonkeyLogic is a Matlab based experimental suite that takes care of stimuli presentation, behavioral data acquisition and storage, and hardware synchronization. It can be used to design and run classical psychophysics experiments, as well as interface with Unity. 

## Task files
In MonkeyLogic, each task is defined from a combination of multiple files:
* a _conditions_ file, which is a **.txt** file containing either a tab separated list of conditions or the filename of a custom _userloop_ function. 
* a _timing file_ which is a **.m** Matlab script defining the progression of individual trials.
* an optional _userloop_ file, which is a **.m** Matlab script that allows more flexibility in defining _conditions_ and _timing files_.

For example, the UnityVR task has a _UnityVR.txt_ _conditions_ file defining the _UnityVR_userloop.m_ file, which in turns selects the _UnityVR.m_ _timing file_. The majority of the code lies in the _timing file_, and executing this file within the MonkeyLogic framework runs a single trial. 

## Trial progression
A single MonkeyLogic trial as defined in the _timing file_ is made of a series of **scenes**, each presenting **task objects** sampled from the _conditions_ file. 

For example, a _conditions_ file (i.e. dms.txt) for a delayed match to sample task would look like this:

Condition | Frequency | Block | Timing File | TaskObject#1 | TaskObject#2 | TaskObject#3 | TaskObject#4	
--- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- 
1 | 1| 1 3 | dms | fix(0,0) | pic(A,0,0) | pic(A,-6,0) | pic(B,6,0)	
2 | 1| 1 3 | dms | fix(0,0) | pic(A,0,0) | pic(A,6,0) | pic(B,-6,0)	
3 | 1| 1 3 | dms | fix(0,0) | pic(B,0,0) | pic(B,-6,0) | pic(A,6,0)	

In this example, the fixation point position, and the specific stimuli (i.e. images) for the cue/target/distractor are sampled from a single row in the _conditions_ file, where TaskObject#1 is the fixation point, #2 is the cue, #3 the correct target and #4 the distractor. Numbers in parentheses are the screen positions.

The _timing file_ (i.e. dms.m) then defines individual trials as the progression of 4 consecutive scenes: 
-	Fixation: fixation point appears and waits for a certain fixation duration
-	Cue: cue appears for a specific duration
-	Delay: maintain fixation for a certain delay
-	Response: target and distractor appear, fixation point disappears, and waits for a saccade to either locations


Each individual **scene** is a combination of task objects (i.e. **Targets**), inputs (i.e. **Trackers**) and possibly nested outcomes (i.e. **Adapters**). Here are some examples: 
-	Fixation Scene: the eye data is sampled (Eye**Tracker**) to check if gaze falls within the fixation window around the current fixation point (outcome == **Adapter**: Single**Target**), then a timer is started to check if the fixation lasts for a predefined time (outcome == **Adapter**: WaitThenHold) before terminating the Scene and moving on to the next one. In other words, the SingleTarget adapter is nested in the WaitThenHold adapter: 
`WaitThenHold( SingleTarget ( EyeTracker ) ) )`.

-	Response Scene: the eye data is sampled (EyeTracker) to check if it falls within the fixation window of either the target or distractor, within a predefined time limit (MultiTarget): `MultiTarget( EyeTracker )`.

This is what it looks like (see the dms.m file for complete code): 
```Matlab

% give names to the TaskObjects defined in the conditions file:
fixation_point = 1;
sample = 2;
target = 3;
distractor = 4;

% define time intervals (in ms):
wait_for_fix = 5000;
initial_fix = 500;
sample_time = 1000;
delay = 1000;
max_reaction_time = 2000;
hold_target_time = 500;

% fixation window (in degrees):
fix_radius = 2;
hold_radius = 2.5;

% scene 1: fixation
fix1 = SingleTarget(eye_);     % We use eye signals (eye_) for tracking. The SingleTarget adapter
fix1.Target = fixation_point;  % checks if the gaze is in the Threshold window around the Target.
fix1.Threshold = fix_radius;   % The Target can be either TaskObject# or [x y] (in degrees).
wth1 = WaitThenHold(fix1);          % The WaitThenHold adapter waits for WaitTime until the fixation
wth1.WaitTime = wait_for_fix;       % is acquired and then checks if the fixation is held for HoldTime.
wth1.HoldTime = initial_fix;        % Since WaitThenHold gets the fixation status from SingleTarget,
                                    % SingleTarget (fix1) must be the input argument of WaitThenHold (wth1).

% In this scene, we will present the fixation_point (TaskObject #1)
% and detect the eye movement indicated by the above parameters.
scene1 = create_scene(wth1,fixation_point);  

% Define other scenes [...]

% Then to run the scenes
run_scene(scene1,10);     % Run the first scene (eventmaker 10)
rt = wth1.AcquiredTime;   % For the reaction time graph
if ~wth1.Success          % If the WithThenHold failed, (either fixation is not acquired or broken during hold)
    idle(0);              % Clear the screen
    if wth1.Waiting       % Check if we were waiting for fixation.
        trialerror(4);    % If so, fixation was never made and this is the "no fixation (4)" error.
    else
        trialerror(3);    % If we were not waiting, it means that fixation was acquired but not held,
    end                   %     so it is the "break fixation (3)" error.
    return
end

% Then run the next scene
```

## Alert function
Each task folder can have a specific file called _alert_function.m_. It is used to run specific code at key moments during experiment execution, such as: 
- Task start/end
- Block start/end
- Trial start/end
- Pause/resume 


For more information or for examples you can either look at the provided task examples in the MonkeyLogic task directory or visit the [MonkeyLogic website](https://monkeylogic.nimh.nih.gov/index.html). 

