## Object Oriented Programming primer
Unity uses the C# language and an Object Oriented Programming (OOP) architecture. As the name implies, the building block of OOP in an _object_, which is defined as a collection of data (i.e. properties or variables) and behaviors (i.e. methods or functions). In code, a collection of variables and functions is defined within a _class_. An _object_ is thus a single _instance_ of a specific _class_. In other words, a _class_ holds the code recipe that can be used to create or _instantiate_ _objects_ when the program is running.

In a VR/video game setting like Unity, objects do not necessarily mean physical or visible objects like avatars, triggers and targets, but also include programs and logical systems such as rules and controllers. It is possible to have multiple objects of the same class co-existing at the same time, where each _instance_ has its own property values. 

Let's do a **pseudo-code** example for a simplified version of the game Tetris to see what a class might look like.

#### Objects, classes and sub-classes
We first need a series of variables and functions (i.e. a class) defining the rules and behaviors of the game. The basic behavior we need to implement is the following: 
1. A block is spawned at the top of the play surface
2. The block moves down at a certain rate
3. The user can move the block left and right, and rotate it in 90 degrees increments
4. Once the block hits the bottom of the play surface or another block it stops 
5. If a row is completely filled, it is cleared and the user scores points
6. The more points a user has, the higher the current level and the faster the blocks are falling down
7. Repeat from 1.

Since many of these behaviors are oblivious to the arrangement of blocks on the play surface, they can be combined into a single class. We will therefore create a "GameController" class that will be responsible for: keeping track of score and level, spawning a block at the top, setting its speed, keeping track of inputs and checking for complete rows. To play the game we need only a single _instance_ of this class. The resulting _object_ will be "invisible" to the user as it is not a "thing" on the screen that can be interacted with. 

```C#
class GameController
{
    // Definition of the GameController's properties
    currentBlocks; // Lists all the instances of blocks 
    blockSpeed; // Speed at which blocks fall
    blockSpawnRate; // Speed at which blocks are created
    currentScore;  // total points
    currentLevel;  // 
    currentTime;  // time in seconds

    // Methods definition
    function SpawnBlock()
    {
        block = new Block(); // Create a block from the Block class defined later
        block.currentSpeed = blockSpeed;  // set the speed
        currentBlocks.Add(block);  // Add to list
    }

    function CheckInput()
    {
        // Rotate the current block according to user input
        // Collapse the block to the bottom if "Down" is pressed
    }

    function CheckForFullLine() 
    {
        // Perform check 
        // Iterate through currentBlocks and call ClearSquares()
        // Increment score
    }

    function IncreaseLevel()
    {
        if (currentScore >= threshold)
        {
            currentLevel += 1;
            blockSpeed += 10;
            blockSpawnRate += 5;
        }
    }

}
```

Some of the behaviors and properties are still not defined: the shapes and colors of individual blocks, their current position and rotation values, and a way to update these values. We thus need a class for the Blocks themselves:

```C#
class Block
{
    // Definition of the block's properties
    color;
    shape; // arrangement of squares making the shape
    currentOrientation;  // rotation value
    currentPosition; 
    currentSpeed; 

    // Methods definition
    function ClearSquares()
    {
        // Remove the squares that complete a row
    }

    function RotateBlock() 
    {
        currentOrientation += 90;
    }
    
    function UpdatePosition() 
    {
        currentPosition.Y -= currentSpeed;
        // Add check for collisions with other blocks or bottom 
        // of play surface
        if (collision == True)
            currentSpeed = 0;
    }

    // ...
}
```

In this case the `GameController` class would only be created once, whereas there could be any amount of `Block` at the same time, each with its own shape, color, and orientation. 

We could make things more interesting by adding a special kind of block called `ExplosiveBlock`, that would behave like an ordinary Block, except when clearing the squares of a complete row, where it would create an explosion and also clear adjacent squares.

When we say "behave like an ordinary block", we mean that it will _inherit_ the properties and behaviors of the `Block` class, to which it can add its own by either creating new methods or by replacing existing ones. In programming language: `ExplosiveBlock` will _sub-class_ `Block` and `override` (i.e. replace) the `ClearSquares` method. 

```c#
// class ClassName : ClassInheritingFrom
class ExplosiveBlock : Block
{
    // By inheriting from the Block class, ExplosiveBlock has also color, shape,
    // currentOrientation, and currentPosition variables, as well as any other 
    // function contained in Block.

    // override means replace the function in the base-class Block.
    // If we call ExplosiveBlock.ClearSquares(), even if it is inheriting
    // from the Block class, the function Block.ClearSquares() will not be 
    // executed.
    override function ClearSquares()
    {
        // BOOM!
    }
}
```

#### Accessibility 
By default, the variables and functions contained within a class are hidden (i.e. not accessible) from other classes. We need a way to tell the engine which is accessible and which is not. For example, the `GameController` class shouldn't be able to modify the Block `color` or `shape`, but needs to be able to modify `currentSpeed`. It should also be able to tell the `Block` to `ClearSquares()` or to `UpdatePosition()`. On the other hand, an `ExplosiveBlock` should be able to select values for `color` and `shape` when it is created.

To define such behaviors we use _keywords_ on methods and properties: 
* `public`: means that it is accessible from anywhere (i.e. any other classes)
* `protected`: means that it is only accessible within the class where it is defined, or its sub-class
* `private`: is only accessible within the class itself, not its sub-class

For example, making the `color` property `protected` would make it accessible to the sub-class `ExplodingBlock` but **not** within the `GameController` class. Making it `private` would make it inaccessible to both the `GameController` and `ExplodingBlock` classes, but still accessible for `Block` objects. In this case, the `ClearSquares()` function should be `public`, since we need the `GameController` to be able to call it. 

#### Singleton
There is another important keyword that requires a bit more explanation than the previous ones: `static`. It can be used for both classes and properties but has different effects on the two. 

First, a `static` class means that this class [cannot be instantiated](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/programming-guide/classes-and-structs/static-classes-and-static-class-members). It serves to hold either methods or properties that do not require interacting with object instances. It is typically used to have a "utilities" class that holds basic data processing or mathematical functions (i.e. simple input-output computations), as well as constants like pi. 

In non-static class instances, changing the value of an object's variable does not change that variable's value across all other instances of that class. We therefore need to define in the code which specific instance we want to modify. In the following example, we create a `new Block()` instance and keep its reference in a variable. We can then change that specific instance's `currentSpeed` by calling `blockInstance.currentSpeed = blockSpeed;`. 

Since static classes can't have instances, all methods and properties can be accessed directly via the class name:

```C#
// NON-STATIC: 
// Object instance reference needed
// here our blockInstance variable is of class "Block" and refers to
// the newly instantiated Block
public Block blockInstance = new Block(); 

// We need to use that specific reference to change its, and only its
// property, not affecting other instances of Block
blockInstance.currentSpeed = blockSpeed;  

// STATIC:
// No instance reference needed
// Assuming a StaticBlock class, we could simply call the following
// to change its unique value:
StaticBlock.currentSpeed = blockSpeed;
```

It is also possible for a non-static class to have static properties and methods. In this case, the static variable or function can be accessed directly from the class name, without requiring the class to be instantiated. The value of a static variable is shared across **all** instances of the class. In other words, setting the value of a static variable means that **all** other objects of the same class will now share the same value for that variable. It creates a single, unique, variable that is common to all instances. Accordingly, static methods cannot access non-static variables of a class, since their value is instance specific, requiring individual instance references. 

The most important example for us is the singleton use. A singleton design aims to have one, and only one, instance of a specific class across the entire scope of the program. To do so, we create a `static` variable holding the reference of the current class instance:

```C#
public class SingletonExample
{
    // scope keyword ClassName variableName = null;
    public static SingletonExample instance = null;

    // This function would be called when trying to create
    // an instance of SingletonExample
    public function CreateNew()
    {
        if (instance == null)
            instance = new SingletonExample();
    }
   
    public function Blah()
    {
        WriteConsole("BLAH");
    }
}
```
The CreateNew() function checks whether the instance has been created, if not, it creates one. If the instance is defined (i.e. not null) then it doesn't create a new one. From this point on, it is possible to access any method or property of the SingletonExample object via its static `instance` variable. 

The advantage of a singleton object is combining the ease of access of a static class (i.e. not having to create and hold reference variables in all the other classes interacting with it) with the functionality of instantiated objects. 

```C#
// To summarize, in a NON-STATIC class, we need to create 
// an instance and keep a reference to it in order to access
// its methods and properties
public NonSingletonExample instanceReference = new NonSingletonExample();

// then access the properties and methods via that instance
instanceReference.Blah();

// In a STATIC class, all methods and properties are accessible from the 
// class name
ThisIsAStaticClass.Blah();

// A singleton is a combination of both. We need to create an instance,
// but don't need to hold a reference to it. This is the static instance
// variable's job.
new SingletonExample();
SingletonExample.instance.Blah();

```

#### Inheritance 
Lastly, when dealing with sub-classing (i.e. inheritance), some other keywords are important regarding the classes and their methods: 

First the `abstract` keyword can be used to declare a class or a function. For a class, it means that it cannot be instantiated as is, it **needs** to be sub-classed. For a function, it means that it **can't** be defined in the base-class, it **needs** to be overridden in the sub-class. Adding lines of code to an abstract function will return an error, it literally cannot be defined in the base-class. Importantly, you cannot have an abstract function within a non-abstract class, but you can have an abstract class with non-abstract functions. 

Second, `virtual` only applies to functions and it means that the method has a default behavior and can be called by itself, but **it has the potential to be overridden** in a sub-class. When a `virtual` function is _overridden_, the replaced function in the base class can still be called via the `base` command.

Let's create an example to illustrate why and how these keywords are useful. In this example, we're creating a VR representation of "Old MacDonald's Farm". In it, a wide variety of animals. To simplify things, we can combine all the common properties and behaviors of animals into a single `Animal` class. Indeed, all farm animals share many properties, such as they all have a mass, a color, a species, fur or feathers, and all share common behaviors, such as moving and speaking. 

Since many four legged animals walk the same way and we are quite lazy, we don't want to have to rewrite the same "Walk" function for all four legged animals sub-classing `Animal`, just because a few farm animals walk on two legs. Instead we'll assume a "default" behavior of four legs and allow the "Walk" function to be replaced in specific sub-classes if need be (i.e. virtual). 

On the other hand, if the song has taught us anything, it's that all animals speak differently, but they **all** speak. We can therefore create an `abstract` function named "Speak" that exists for all animals but **needs** to be defined for each specific type of animal (i.e. in the sub-class). 

Since we now have a function that **needs** to be defined in a sub-class, our `Animal` class now has to be `abstract` too. Indeed, it doesn't mean anything in itself if it **requires** more definitions in order to make a functional animal. We can't have objects with undefined behaviors running about. 

Let's see the code: 

```C#
public abstract class Animal
{
    public abstract void Speak(); // Cannot define a default behavior

    public virtual void Walk()  // Default behavior can be overridden
    {
    	MovePaw("left front");
    	MovePaw("right rear");
    	MovePaw("right front");
    	MovePaw("left rear");
    }
}

// No need to override the Walk function     
public class Dog : Animal
{
    public override void Speak()
    {
    	WriteOutput("Bark");
    }
}
     
public class Horse : Animal
{
    public override void Speak()
    {
    	WriteOutput("Neigh");
    }
}
     
public class Bird : Animal
{
    public override void Speak()
    {
    	WriteOutput("Tweet");
    }
    
    public override void Walk()
    {
    	MovePaw("left");
    	MovePaw("right");
    }
}

```

The usefulness of the abstract function/class might not be readily apparent. To illustrate it, let's assume that we want the animals to "speak" when a user interacts with them. We could trigger a call to a function called "interact" in the "user" class when a button is pressed. But interact with what? How? 

We can't just tell the script to call the "Speak" function of the object interacted with, because if that function does not exist in the object's class then it will trigger an error. We could check the class of the interacted object to see whether it is a Bird, a Dog, a Horse, a Cow,... but it's obvious that having a lot of animals or adding a new one becomes very tedious. Therefore having an abstract base-class with the abstract Speak function would simplify things. The "interact" function just needs to check if the object derives from "Animal", if so, call "Speak". 

```C#
public class User
{
    public void Interact()
    {
        if (object is Animal)
           object.Speak();
    }
}

```

#### Get and Set functions
In OOP there is a way to execute small snippets of code when a property's value is fetched (get) or modified (set). The main utility for this is to create "Read-Only" variables, meaning that their value is accessible from every other class (i.e. public) but that only the containing class can modify it. Since `set` and `get` are functions, we can simply change their scope to create a read-only variable like so:
```C#
public string ConfidentialData { get; protected set;}

// Some code can also be added to the set and get functions
protected bool _isAuthorized = false;
public bool IsAuthorized 
{
    get // Anyone can read
    {
        return _isAuthorized;
    }
    set  // only specified users can change
    {
        if (UserIsTopSecret)
        {
            _isAuthorized = value;
        }
        else
        {
            WriteToConsole("Error insufficient privileges.");
        }
    }
}
```

## C# vs Matlab
The following sections will use **real code**, and not pseudo-code as before. 

#### Strongly typed vs weakly typed variables
Since C# is a much lower level programming language (i.e. closer to CPU language) than Matlab, it requires a few more keywords when declaring variables and functions. 

Where in Matlab, a basic Addition function can look like this:
```Matlab
function returnValue = Addition(a, b)
    returnValue = a + b;
end
```

In C# we need to specify the types of each variable within the function, such as string, float, bool, and int, as well as the value type returned by the function:
```C#
// keywords returnType functionName(inputType inputName)
public int Addition(int a, int b)
{
    int returnValue = a + b;
    return returnValue;
}
```

In other words, in Matlab, a weakly typed language, calling the Addition function like so: `Addition("Bob", 1)` would be fine and would return `"Bob1"`. In C#, a strongly typed language, it would generate an error since the parameter `a` is expecting an integer number. Even setting `string returnValue = a + b;` would be an error because the function is expected to return an integer, not a string. In C# you cannot change the type of a defined variable and can't implicitly combine variable types, you need to explicitly (i.e. code it) convert them beforehand. 

#### Packages and libraries
While Matlab requires some packages to be installed in order to access their function, once installed you have access to everything everywhere. In C#, you need to specify which library a class is _using_ in order to have access to its classes and functions. For example, some classes such as `Color`, `AudioSource` or `Collider` are located within the `UnityEngine` library, to access these classes within another class you need to tell the compiler you are _using_ it: 
```C#
using UnityEngine;

public class Test
{
    // keyword type name
    public Color objectColor;  // Color is not defined if not using UnityEngine
    public int objectSize;  // some types are always accessible
}
```

#### Instantiation, pointers and references
To go back to the Tetris example, we need a way to enable `GameController` to create new blocks, keep track of all the blocks and specify exactly which block should execute which function. 

To create a new Block we can use the `new` command. This will instantiate a new object of class Block and return the reference to that object. The returned reference can be stored in a variable of type "Block".

To keep track of all the blocks we could add this reference to a collection of objects such as a _List_ or an _Array_. These collections can be of any type such as Objects, int, string,... but differ mainly in their usage:
* Arrays: their size need to be specified upon creation
* Lists: have a dynamic size and can change at any time

In code: 
```C#
// instantiates a new Block and returns the reference to newBlock
public Block newBlock = new Block(); 

// instantiates a List of Blocks
public List<Block> lstBlocks = new List<Block>(); 

// instantiates an Array of 12 Blocks
public Block[] arrBlocks = new Block[12];  

lstBlocks.Add(newBlock);  // can be added to the end of the list
arrBlocks[0] = newBlock;  // needs to be added at a specific index

// Can call a specific function on the newBlock
newBlock.RotateBlock();

```

#### Scope and default values
Similarly to Matlab, a variable declared as a class property will be accessible throughout all functions of the class, whereas a variable declared within a function will be discarded when the function terminates. Moreover, default values can be given to class properties upon declaration. If no value is given, the value will be `null`. 

```C#
public class Test
{
    // the "f" casts 0.12345 to float, as the default type is double
    public float floatingPointNumber = 0.12345f; 
    public int integerNumber;  // will be null

    // Classes cannot be instantiated here
    public Block blockReference;  // cannot use the "new" command

    // when a method doesn't return a value, use "void"
    public void CreateBlock()
    {
        // class variables are accessible here
        blockReference= new Block();

        // Count will be destroyed when the function is done executing
        int Count = 2;
    }
}
```



