#### Unity won't launch. 
If you see the Unity splash screen but the Editor won't open after that, some files might be preventing it from opening. This usually happens after a git pull. To fix this, go to your favorite command prompt, navigate to the MTLab_UnitySource directory and run:
```
git clean -fxd
```

#### Messed up transitions
You need to uncheck the “Has exit time” transition property in the animator states, if not it will add a delay between script execution and state changes. Without it, it will use the value defined in “Exit Time” as a timer and will transition after X number of seconds have elapsed. 
Both Transition Duration and Transition Offset need to be set to 0. 


#### FullScreen View
Under the DisplayController game object, it holds the screen parameters like resolution, offset (whether the right of left display), the player camera FOV, and whether to launch a full screen window on Play. It also contains a nested game object called PhotoDiodeFlash that flashes a square in the bottom left corner of the screen to sync frames with a photodiode. (This section requires testing as it currently changes the square within the full grayscale spectrum on a randomized frame duration. Unsure how sensitive the photodiode will be to these values.) 


#### Monkeylogic eye calibration
The eye data needs to be calibrated before running the Unity task. The calibration data is then sent to Unity and this allows it to get a raw data sample directly from the Eyelink and properly convert the data to gaze position in both pixels and degrees. This is an overview of the calibration algorithm.
From the timing script we can access the calibration data from: eye_.CalFun.tform, which is a (1,3) cell array of structures containing the useful fields: 
* {1}: offset 
    * [x,y] Offset from the center of the screen
* {2}: rotation_t
    * [2x2] rotation matrix, usually = eye(2)
* {3}: tdata.T 
    * [3x3] forward projective matrix to convert eyelink raw data to degrees

To convert from eyelink raw data to pixel values we need these formulas: 
```
[X, Y, adjust] = [RawX, RawY, 1] * eye_CalFun.tform{3}.tdata.T 
EyeDegX = X / adjust
EyeDegY = Y / adjust
([EyeDegX, EyeDegY] – offset) * rotation_t

ScreenWidth = eye_.Screen.Xsize
ScreenHeight = eye_.Screen.YSize
PixPerDeg = eye_.Screen.PixelsPerDegree
```

Assuming that the top-left is (0,0) in pixel values: 
```
EyePixX = (EyeDegX * PixPerDeg) + 0.5 * ScreenWidth
EyePixY = - (EyeDegY * PixPerDeg) + 0.5 * ScreenHeight
```

These values are also accessible via:
* MLConfig.EyeTransform{1,1} : offset
* MLConfig.EyeTransform{1,2} : rotation
* MLConfig.EyeTransform{1,3} : tform
* MLConfig.PixelsPerDegree(1) 
* MLConfig.Screen.Xsize/Ysize

#### State system
The order of script execution is Update -> State Machine Update -> Late Update so we send the Player/Eye data on Update to the ExperimentController, then the state system checks the values on state machine update and triggers the state change accordingly.
On the same frame that the condition is met in Update, both the on state exit and on state enter of the next state are executed. The next frame will execute the Update of the second state. 

